[Music]
eight intelligence at Twilight
while the period between the two world
wars was largely one of dormancy or
disintegration with regard to federal
intelligence activities and operations
there were certain exceptions to this
situation developments which due to a
few outstanding personalities and/or
monumental events marked the continued
but slow evolution and advancement of
intelligence capabilities in 1920 Marine
Corps commandant John a Lejeune
overhauled the headquarters staff in a
manner emulating the Army's General
Staff reorganization of 1903 and the
Navy's central administrative structure
of 1915 when the Chief of Naval
Operations position came into existence
within the operations and training
division which was one of seven
administrative entities reporting
directly to the Commandant an
intelligence section was instituted
footnote generally see US Marine Corps
headquarters historical division a brief
history of headquarters Marine Corps
staff organization by Kenneth W Condit
John H John Stone and Ella W NAR gel
Washington historical division
headquarters US Marine Corps 1971 pages
12 through 15
Robert Deb's heinel jr. soldiers of the
sea Annapolis United States Naval
Institute 1962 pages 253 through 255 end
footnote little is known about the
resources or activities of this unit but
it appears to have developed combat
intelligence products for the Corps and
to have cooperated with naval
intelligence and preparing war plans and
strategic information quote one of the
Marine officers who is concerned with
such planning during the 1920s was major
later lieutenant colonel earl h ellis
like many other military officers ellis
was cognizant of the japanese threat in
the pacific in 1920 the Office of Naval
Intelligence prepared a study concerning
the possibility of a trans-pacific war
against Japan
and various agencies within the Navy
Department were directed to implement
the study with plans of their own
the Marine Corps contributed to what
ultimately became known as the orange
plan and Ellis made a major contribution
to that portion of the plan which dealt
with advanced base operations the
document he wrote operation plans 712
advanced base operations in Micronesia
was approved by the Commandant on 23rd
of July in 1921 in his writing Ellis
pointed out it will be necessary for us
to project our fleet and landing forces
across the Pacific and wage war in
Japanese waters to effect this requires
that we have sufficient basis to support
the fleet both during its projection and
afterwards to effect an amphibious
landing in the face of enemy resistance
requires careful training and
preparation to say the least and this
along marine lines it is not enough that
the troops be skilled infantrymen or
artillery men of high morale they must
be skilled Waterman and jungle men who
know it can be done Marines with Marine
training footnote US Marine Corps
headquarters historical division a
concise history of the United States
Marine Corps 1775 through 1969 by
William D Parker Washington historical
Division Headquarters US Marine Corps
1970 page 46 also see heinel pages 255
through to 57 in footnote though the
observations of Earl Ellis were
prophetic he never lived to realize
their actuality for he was to become a
martyr to the intelligence cause he
served so well a Kansas farm boy born in
1880 Ellis joined the Marine Corps at
the turn of the century and sufficiently
distinguished himself that he received a
commission before American entry into
World War one advanced to major during
the conflict and one for decorations as
well closely associated with Lejeune
since 1914
Ellis was brought to Washington when his
superior assumed command of the Corps in
1920 he was apparently put to immediate
work on Orange planned studies which
consumed so much of his time and energy
that he was rarely seen outside of his
office and eventually fell ill shortly
after completing his paper during his
recovery his views true harsh criticism
from the peace proponents and
disarmament advocates of the our quote
discharged after three months
hospitalization he returned to duty two
weeks later with considerable casualness
he asked for 90 days leave to visit
France Belgium and Germany there were
two curious circumstances connected with
his request for leave in the first place
the request was approved by the
Secretary of the Navy the same day it
was received returned the following day
the letter set an all-time record for
prompt handling of official
correspondence the second oddity was
noticed by General Lejeune secretary
prior to his departure Ellis called at
the Commandant office to say goodbye
during the apparently normal
conversation between the two officers
the secretary noticed Ellis pass a
sealed envelope to the general without
comment Lejeune unobtrusively slipped it
into his desk drawer
having said his goodbyes Lieutenant
Colonel Ellis walked out of the front
door of Marine Corps headquarters and
vanished
end quote footnote PN Pierce the
unsolved mystery of Pete Ellis marine
corps Gazette the 46 February 1962 36
and 37 this is the most complete account
of the Ellis case to date and the
material which follows is taken from
this story and footnote Ellis was never
seen in Europe no communique
was received from him for almost a year
when his official leave expired and an
inquiry was made as to how he was to be
carried on the muster roll the adjutant
inspector ordered continued to carry on
leave finally a friend received a
cryptic cablegram from Ellis who was in
Sydney Australia he had been treated for
a kidney infection there and was on
route to Japan some six weeks later he
was in the Philippines where he sent a
classified and coded dispatch to Marine
Corps headquarters inquiring about the
extension of his leave the response sent
top priority was a single sentence leave
extension granted for Period six months
in mid-august the US Naval Hospital in
Yokohama Japan was asked to attend to a
desperately ill American at the Grand
Hotel
the man was Ellis again suffering from
nephritis he identified himself
indicating he was a Marine officer
touring the Orient on leave two weeks
later he was released only to be
admitted the following week with the
same acute condition believing him to be
an alcoholic Navy medical authorities
gave Ellis the choice of returning to
the United States by the next transport
or by mail steamer to facilitate his
recuperation Ellis chose the latter
wired his American Bank for $1,000 on
October 4th received the money
two days later and vanished that night
from his hospital bed nothing was heard
about Ellis for six months then on May
23rd 1923 the State Department received
the following from the American Embassy
in Tokyo I am informed by the
governor-general of Japanese South Sea
Islands that eh Ellis representative of
Hughes trading company number two rector
Street New York City holder of
Department passport number for 249 died
at Koror Caroline islands on May 12th
remains and effects in possession of
Japanese government awaiting
instructions
quote as a matter of standard procedure
the State Department checked with the
Hughes trading company by a strange
coincidence the company's president
turned out to be a retired Marine
colonel from him State was surprised to
learn that eh Ellis was not a commercial
traveller at all he was in fact a Marine
Corps officer on an intelligence mission
at that point a lot of Washington
telephones began ringing followed by a
noticeable increase in Pacific cable
traffic end quote
in many regards the phones are still
ringing in need of someone to answer
badgered by reporters Lejeune reinforced
his claim of innocence regarding Ellis's
activities by finally claiming that the
officer had been AWOL for some time he
apparently could not bring himself to
use the contents of the sealed envelope
which Ellis had given him supposedly an
undated letter of resignation which the
Commandant burned from various peace
mill sources it would appear that Ellis
was indeed on an intelligence mission
surveying japanese-held islands in the
Pacific probably with a view to
gathering as much information to support
the orange plan suppositions regarding
Japanese strategic power as he could
observe it would also seem that Ellis
did not have a credible cover posing as
a traitor had too much unaccounted for
money with him and was given to drinking
bouts during which he very likely
dropped his guard in any event the
Japanese were aware of his real identity
and mission in their territory
confirmation of his true purposes for
being in the Pacific has yet to be made
through documentation and records and of
course the manner of Ellis death the
reason for his remains being cremated
and the loss of his personal effects all
still remain a mystery the Army and the
Navy continued their less daring attache
arrangements during the period between
the wars though there was reluctance on
the part of the United States Armed
Services to appoint Air anti-phase
during most of these years
footnote alfred vats the military
attache Princeton Princeton University
Press
1967 page 67 this account surveys the
growth and development of the military
attache system in international politics
tracing its evolution from the 17th
century to the modern diplomatic period
end footnote there were various
tribulations which intelligence
operatives faced at this time due to the
prevailing disarmament fervor and the
inability of defense leaders to
appreciate the intelligence product when
it was available captain Ellis M
Zacharias was a career Navy officer who
went to Japan in 1920 to study the
culture and language of the country and
to report on strategic developments
coming to his attention as well within
the office of naval intelligence however
the whole Far East section quote
occupied just one room holding one
officer and one stenographer oh and I
itself comprised a handful of officers
and a few yeoman filing the occasional
reports of naval attache about naval
appropriations of the countries to which
they were attached a few notes on
vessels building or projected most of
them clipped from local newspapers and
descriptions of parties given in honor
of some visiting American celebrity the
last-named
usually represented the most
illuminating and comprehensive of these
so-called intelligence reports end quote
footnote Ellis M Zacharias secret
missions the story of an intelligence
officer New York GP Putnam's sons 1946
pages 20 through 21 after three years
and six months in Japan Zacharias
returned to Washington filled with
trepidation and information regarding
the plans and activities of imperialist
Japan however his greeting at Oh n I was
not enthusiastic quote the director
listened to my report with gentlemanly
boredom and evident condescension and
then suddenly closed the discussion
without
any indication of a follow-up job for me
I soon found out that no one had given
it the slightest thought it was not in
the routine I had spent three years
studying a forbidding language
penetrating the mind of a strange people
gathering data of vital importance
participating in secret missions and now
it was my turn for sea duty to put it
bluntly
I was to forget all extraneous matters
and refit myself into the general
routine of a naval career I went to the
Far East section of Naval Intelligence
but they are too I found but yawning
indifference and complacency regardless
of the hostile attitudes then displayed
by the Japanese and their vitriolic
press my reports were gratifyingly
acknowledged but completely overlooked i
was concerned and frustrated a state of
mind which was hardly conducive to
ingratiating myself to my superiors but
I could not arouse them to the dangers
of the day end quote while in Japan
Zacharias and his colleagues and also
experienced this indifference to
intelligence operations and products in
the limitation of their resources and
number quote the limited means at our
disposal prevented us from observing the
Japanese in their administration of the
mandated Islands neither did we have
means or men to find out Japanese
intentions and aggressive plans beyond
what we could pick up in the open market
of peacetime intelligence captain Watson
was concerned about these mandated
Islands where the Japanese were reliably
reported to be going about merrily
violating the mandate which prohibited
their fortification the few reports
which reached us from these Pacific
Islands indicated feverish activities
merchantmen discharging material
obviously designed for the building of
gun emplacements bunkers and underground
passages naval vessels calling at those
Islands and delivering heavy caliber
Coast guns and other equipment all
contraband according to the provisions
of the mandate
although greatly concerned Watson could
not obtain permission to establish an
effective check on these activities or
to ascertain the accuracy of the
numerous reports coming to his ears end
quote
concern over the fortification of the
mandated Islands had also apparently
prompted the mission of Earl Ellis from
Zacharias and his colleagues scrutinized
but lost and Yokohama ironically when
the islands were seized during world war
ii quote we discovered that it was their
weakness rather than strength that the
japanese were so anxious to conceal end
quote
before his second tour of duty in japan
Zacharias in 1926 gained acquaintance
with the Navy's cryptanalytic
organization quote my days were spent in
study and work among people with whom
security had become second nature hours
went by without any of us saying a word
just sitting in front of piles of
indexed sheets on which a mumbo-jumbo of
figures or letters was displaced in
chaotic disorder trying to solve the
puzzle bit by bit like fitting together
the pieces of a jigsaw puzzle we were
just a few then in room 26:46 young
people who gave ourselves to
cryptography with the same aesthetic
devotion with which young men enter a
monastery it was known to everyone that
the secrecy of our work would prevent
the ordinary recognition accorded to
other accomplishments it was then that I
first learned that intelligence work
like virtue is its own reward
end quote Zacharias had a second tour of
duty in Japan monitored and deciphered
Japanese Navy radio messages from a
station in Shanghai headed the Far East
section of omi at the time of the
outbreak of war in Europe became the
director of Naval Intelligence in 1942
saw combat duty was assigned to the
Office of War Information at the time of
the Japanese surrender and retired from
active duty in 1946 as a Rear Admiral an
author and lecturer on intelligence
operations he
died in 1961 military intelligence also
had its professional problems during
this period - as was graphically
demonstrated during the bonus march
quote in the summer of 1932 President
Hoover faced one of the most trying
problems imaginable the presence in the
nation's capital of thousands of needy
veterans who were determined to force
the immediate payment of the soldiers
bonus from every part of the country by
almost every conceivable means of
transportation veterans flocked to
Washington to demand that Congress
relieve by a flood of cash the economic
paralysis which had settled over the
United States
reminiscent of the followers of coxy
forty years before the veterans seized
trains in East st. Louis and Baltimore
and took temporary possession of the
Pennsylvania Railroad yard at Cleveland
their presence in Washington was
described as a supreme escape gesture
end quote
footnote Bennett Milton rich the
president's and civil disorder
Washington the Brookings Institute 1941
pages 167 and 168 although the House
passed a bill allocating the funds
sought by the marchers the president let
it be known he would not approve the
measure the legislation failed in the
Senate and Congress shortly thereafter
adjourned before leaving Washington
however the legislative branch at the
chief executives urging provided
$100,000 to transport the veterans home
still they came to the Capitol and
tracing their advance was military
intelligence which had sent the
following requests and secret code to
all core area commanders quote with
reference to any movement of veteran
bonus marchers to Washington originating
or passing through your core area it is
desired that a brief radio report in
secret code be made to War Department
indicating presence if any of
communistic elements
and names of leaders of known
communistic leanings end quote quote
most of the replies to this were
reasonably sane if not too astute 9th
core area for example could not discover
when the Oregon contingent left Portland
a fact that was reported in the local
newspapers it did correctly evaluate the
political complexion of roiled W
Robertson's Californians pointing out
not only the absence of communist
activity but also that its leader was
firm and stand that communists will not
be tolerated in neighboring 8th corps
however an almost undiluted paranoia
prevailed the intelligence reports
emanating from Fort Sam Houston Texas
are simply incredible and Lindh
verisimilitude to at least the last
proviso of the army legend that the
brain ego to the engineers the brave to
the infantry the Deaf to the artillery
and the stupid to intelligence in any
event the Texas based intelligence
experts convinced themselves that the
Californians were dangerous communists
with a leader named royal P Robinson and
that metro-goldwyn-mayer was financing
the whole movement in case Washington
didn't know what it was Colonel James
Totten told them metro-goldwyn-mayer
picture corporation is known to be 100%
Jewish as to controlling personnel and
that high officers of this company are
in politics an unconfirmed rumors
circulated many months ago stated that
agents of USSR had contacted motion
picture companies in California and
contributed to some of them with a view
to inserting propaganda and support of
USSR policies other reports
machine guns in the hands of bonus
marchers forged discharges available for
50 cents from any pawn broker in Chicago
this from an officer in Philadelphia
while another report early in July
claimed that bonus army leader Walter W
waters had the assistance of gunmen from
New York and Washington and that the
first blood shed by the Bonus Army in
Washington is to be the signal for a
communist uprising in all large cities
end quote
footnote Roger Daniels the bonus march
an episode of the great depression
Westport Connecticut greenwood
publishing company 1971 pages 159 and
160 also see Donald J Eliseo the
president and protest Hoover conspiracy
and the bonus riot Columbia University
of Missouri press 1974 pages 87 through
109 in a footnote of course there was
bloodshed in Washington that summer but
not necessarily due to the ineptitude of
military intelligence the communist
uprising some marchers took advantage of
the congressional funds made available
for their return home but it was
estimated that some 11,000 persons
located at 24 separate camps in the
capital remained behind as a result of
disturbances in and around federal
buildings undergoing demolition and a
brief riot which followed one eviction
scene where one veteran was killed at
the scene and another fatally wounded
federal troops requested by the District
of Columbia government were brought into
the city a tank platoon and a cavalry
squadron together with an infantry
battalion were called into action about
500 troops were located in the district
with another 1,000 held in reserve at
nearby military installations on the
afternoon of July 28th these forces
under the command of General Douglas
MacArthur advanced on the Pennsylvania
Avenue encampment of the veterans quote
the cavalry led the way followed by
Tanks machine gunners and infantry all
headed toward the fort of the BEF
bonus expeditionary force a skeletonized
building at third street after a half
hours wait the troops donned gas masks
and in a few minutes of tear gas bombing
completely cleared the fort the troops
were deployed in such a fashion as to
drive the marchers away from the
business area and toward the encampment
at Anacostia this was accomplished
without the troops firing a shot
although apparently there was a
considerable display of swinging cavalry
sabers and prodding bayonets end quote
after a brief halt at the edge of the
Anacostia encampment of the veterans the
troops moved into the shack town and
throughout the night completed its
destruction without any shelter
penniless and unwanted the veterans fled
the district reportedly quote aghast at
the failure of their confident
prediction that no soldier would move
into action against them end quote there
were of course higher plateaus of army
intelligence during this time the
pinnacles being held by William F
Friedman and his Signal Corps colleagues
who broke the intricate and
sophisticated Japanese cipher known to
Americans as the purple code born in
Russia in 1891 Friedman emigrated to the
United States with his parents the
following year he matriculated as one of
ten honors students in a class of 300 at
Pittsburg Central High School in 1909
and received an undergraduate degree in
genetics from Cornell University in 1914
through an interest in the authorship of
the plays of William Shakespeare and
related literary questions Friedman
became a skilled cryptologist during
1917 and 1918 he taught crypt analysis
to army officers and produced some
riding on the subject in 1921
Friedman and his wife also a skilled
cryptologist entered into a six-month
contract with the Signal Corps and
continued the relationship as civil
servants on the War Department payroll
until 1922
he became chief crypt analyst and head
of the code and cypher compilation
section research and development
division office of the chief signal
officer quote meanwhile the army had
been studying its divided Cryptologic
operation and shortly before the State
Department withdrew support for
Yardley's Bureau had decided to
integrate both cryptographic and
cryptanalytic functions in the Signal
Corps the closing of the black chamber
eased the transition and on May 10th
1929 Cryptologic responsibilities
devolved upon the chief signal officer
to better meet these new
responsibilities the Signal Corps
established a signal intelligence
service in its war plans and training
division with freedmen as director it's
officially stated mission was to prepare
the Army's codes and ciphers to
intercept and solve enemy communications
in war and in peace
to do the training and research a vague
enough term necessary to become
immediately operational at the outbreak
of war to carry out these duties
freedmen hired three junior crypt
analysts all in their early 20s at
$2,000 a year the first of the second
generation of American cryptologists
they were Frank rollit a Virginian and
Solomon Cole back and Abram Singh cough
close friends who had taught together in
New York City High School's before
coming to Washington and who both
received their PhDs and mathematics a
few years later it was the beginning of
an expansion that led to the purple
solution the triumphs of World War two
and the massive Cryptologic organization
of today at his death on November 2nd
1969 he was widely regarded as the
greatest cryptologist that science had
ever seen end quote
the breaking of the cop
purple code was part of a continuous
effort by the Army and Navy to decipher
and monitor Japanese communications
largely under the immediate leadership
of freedmen since its creation sometime
in 1936 the project had been dubbed
magic quote the cipher machine that
Americans knew as purple bore the
resounding official Japanese title of 97
cheeky Obon ng key this meant
alphabetical typewriter 97 the 97 an
abbreviation for the year two five nine
seven of the Japanese calendar which
corresponds to 1937 the Japanese usually
referred to it simply as the machine or
as J the name given it by the Imperial
Japanese Navy which had adapted it from
the german enigma cipher machine and
then had lent it to the foreign ministry
which in turn had further modified it
its operating parts were housed in a
drawer sized box between two big black
electrically operated Underwood
typewriters which were connected to it
by 26 wires plugged into a row of
sockets called a plug board - in cipher
a message the cipher clerk would consult
the you go book of machine keys plug in
the wire connections according to the
key for the day turn the four disks in
the box so the numbers on their edges
were those directed by the you go and
type out the plaintext his machine would
record the plaintext while the other
getting the electrical impulses after
the coding box had twisted them through
the devious paths would print out the
ciphertext deciphering was the same
though the Machine irritatingly printed
the plaintext in the five letter groups
of the ciphertext input the alphabetical
typewriter worked on Roman letters not
katakana hence it could in cypher
English as well as Roman G and also
Roman letter code texts
the machine could not in cypher numerals
or punctuation the code clerk first
transformed them into three-letter code
words given in a small code list and in
ciphered these the receiving clerk would
restore the punctuation paragraphing and
so on when typing up a finished copy of
the decode the coding wheels and plug
boards produced a cipher of great
difficulty the more a cipher deviates
from the simple form in which one
ciphertext letter and variably replaces
the same plaintext letter the harder it
is to break a cipher might replace a
given plaintext letter by five different
cipher text letters and rotation for
example but the alphabetical typewriter
produced a substitution series hundreds
of thousands of letters long its coding
wheels stepping a space or two or three
or four after every letter or so did not
return to their original positions to
recreate the same series of paths and
hence the same sequence of substitutes
until hundreds of thousands of letters
had been in ciphered the task of the
Crypt analysts consisted primarily of
reconstructing the wiring and switching
of the coding wheels a task made more
burdensome by the daily change of
plugboard connections once this was done
the Crypt analyst still had to determine
the starting position at the coding
wheels for each day's messages but this
was a comparatively simple secondary job
end quote the first complete solution of
a purple communique was made in August
1940 by the time of the Pearl Harbor
attack decoded Japanese messages were
circulating at the highest levels of the
federal government though this
decipherment advantage was not
sufficient in itself to prevent the
surprise bombing of Hawaii and
simultaneous aggression against American
Pacific outposts the ability to decode
Japanese communications served military
and naval strategists well during the
war but there was another war of sorts
fought within the United States prior to
the outbreak of hostilities once again
in Europe and also in Asia
this was the war against organized crime
a variety of law enforcement agencies
were involved in the federal
government's attack upon the lawless and
various intelligence developments
occurred during this effort with the
arrival of Harlan F stone at the Justice
Department as the new Attorney General
in March 1924 the general intelligence
division of the Bureau of Investigation
began to be phased out of existence but
the interests of GID did not fail to
continue to receive attention upon its
demise if only because the unit's leader
J Edgar Hoover ultimately became on
December 10th 1924 the head of the
entire Bureau other intelligence
resources which were developed at this
time included special capabilities with
regard to the identification of
kidnappers and their victims and a
fingerprint databank quote on July 1st
1936 the bureau had on file
six million ninety four thousand nine
hundred sixteen fingerprint records
consisting of five million five hundred
seventy 1995 criminal records and five
hundred twenty two thousand nine hundred
twenty one personal identification Civil
Service and miscellaneous non criminal
records on that date nine thousand nine
hundred for law enforcement officials
and agencies throughout the United
States and foreign countries were
contributing four thousand seven hundred
fingerprint cards daily six months later
that is on December 31st 1936 the number
of fingerprint records had increased to
six million six hundred eighty two
thousand six hundred nine and the number
of contributing agencies to ten thousand
two hundred twenty nine and quote
footnote Arthur C millspaugh Crime
Control by the national government
Washington the Brookings Institute 1937
page 90 also C Whitehead pages 154
through 166 and footnote not only did
this elementary intelligence information
prove useful in the necessity of
establishing a basic positive
identification of certain individual
but it also provided a basis for
information exchange between the bureau
and sub-national law enforcement
agencies as well as a relationship
between the bureau and international or
foreign law enforcement units the bureau
also established a technical laboratory
during the latter part of 1932 while the
facility is largely concerned with the
application of scientific techniques to
criminal evidence certain aspects of its
program might be viewed as having a
potential for contributing to an
intelligence product increased
responsibilities with regard to taxation
narcotics control and national
prohibition during this period brought
about various intelligence function
developments within the units of the
Treasury Department quote most of the
other federal crime control agencies are
in the habit of filing identification
material on a comparatively small scale
the Secret Service maintains an
identification file of single
fingerprints of all known makers of
counterfeit money and their associates
arrested since 1928 the names of these
offenders and their aliases are arranged
alphabetically for convenient reference
the service also maintains an
identification file of a regular
fingerprints of persons arrested and
convicted for counterfeiting which also
contains the photographs and previous
criminal records of such offenders the
Enforcement Division of the alcohol tax
unit operates an elaborate filing and
cross-reference system for
identification and classification
purposes an identification file is
maintained in the bureau of narcotics
included are the fingerprints
photographs and criminal records of
persons arrested for violation of the
federal narcotics laws the field offices
of the customs agency service including
the Customs patrol maintain
identification files of individuals and
also indices of various known smuggling
vessels end quote with regard to its
special mission of protecting the
president the secret service continued
during this time to quote exercise
in general a tactful but effective
surveillance overall those who come into
contact with the chief executive end
quote
the United States Coast Guard created in
1915 by combining the life-saving
service and the Revenue Cutter service
had a single intelligence officer
attached to the Commandant staff until
prohibition-era duties prompted the
creation of intelligence units within
field offices the first such
intelligence group was established in
the New York office in 1930 with San
Francisco mobile and Boston being
favored with intelligence personnel
during the next four years in 1936 the
Coast Guard not only obtained general
criminal law enforcement powers but also
created an Intelligence Division at its
Washington headquarters the purpose of
these special intelligence field units
was largely to monitor radio
communications between ships hovering
outside the 12-mile limit laden with
illegal liquor and distilled spirits and
their land-based accomplices quote the
operation was directed from clandestine
shore radio stations but since the
smugglers were aware that the radio
messages could be intercepted they
communicated the time and place of
rendezvous between speedboats and supply
vessels by way of complex codes
obviously if the Coast Guard could break
the ever-changing codes in a hurry it
could catch up with the liquor laden
speedboats much more effectively than
through a blind search of the coastline
by the spring of 1927 an enormous number
of code messages had accumulated on the
desk of the one-man intelligence office
at Coast Guard headquarters the secret
communications had been intercepted on
both the Atlantic and Pacific coasts and
the volume was increasing daily at that
point an expert Crypt analyst mrs.
Elizabeth Smith Friedman was brought in
to the Coast Guard to solve the hundreds
of messages on file within two months
she had reduced the mass of coded
messages from unknown to known it was
then that the Coast Guard decided to
launch an intelligence service based on
fast
translation of whatever secret messages
fell into its hands end quote
the Coast Guard's expert was the wife of
William F Friedman the man who directed
the magic task force destined to break
the Japanese purple code as a
consequence of her efforts the Coast
Guard prior to World War two maintained
an intelligence staff of investigators
and crude analysts which did not exceed
40 individuals during the 1930s
and within the Bureau of Internal
Revenue there was the Intelligence Unit
which one contemporary account described
saying quote the intelligence unit is
located in the immediate office of the
commissioner of Internal Revenue at the
end of 1936 the unit consisted of three
divisions one the personnel enrolment
and Records Division two
the fraud division and three the field
districts the districts were 15 in
number and the field force on June 30th
1936 numbered 196 men in addition to the
investigation of violations of Internal
Revenue laws the Intelligence Unit is
concerned with serious infractions of
disciplinary rules or regulations on the
part of officials and employees of the
Bureau of Internal Revenue and when
directed by the secretary of the
Treasury the unit investigates alleged
irregularities by officials and
employees of other branches of the
Treasury Department in addition a large
part of the work of the unit relates to
investigations of applicants for
positions in the bureau and in certain
other branches of the department - the
unit is also assigned the investigation
of applicants for admission to practice
before the Treasury Department has
attorneys and agents and the
investigation of charges against
enrolled attorneys and agents unquote
these were the intelligence forces
engaged in warfare against organized
crime racketeers and gangsterism but a
larger scale and far more ominous
warfare was in the offering as the 1930s
spent themselves and international
politics witnessed the arrival of
totalitarianism in Europe and Asia Adolf
Hitler came to power in Germany in 1933
and in six years led that nation in
rearmament a fanatic belief in racial
supremacy dictatorial government and a
territorial expansion which included
portions of Czechoslovakia all of
Austria and threatened the Polish
corridor and the sorrow region Japan in
the meantime
at colonized Manchuria renamed Manchu
coup oh and Korea and continued to
pressure the Chinese for more territory
as troops spilled southward toward the
nan yang Peninsula while these
developments occurred the United States
espoused and continued to maintain an
official policy of strict neutrality
with regard to diplomatic entanglement
and brewing overseas hostilities
however this position of international
neutrality did not mean that the United
States would not prepare for its own
defense or fail to take steps to
maintain its own domestic well-being
during the period of crisis if
conscientious intelligence personnel
were not alerted to the gravity of the
world situation prior to the outbreak of
war in Europe then they soon became so
informed when one week later on
September 8 1939 President Roosevelt
declared a condition of limited national
emergency thereby making certain
extraordinary powers available to the
chief executive and limited only in the
sense that neither the defense of the
country nor its internal economy would
be placed upon a war footing footnote
such a proclamation had apparently been
contemplated in late 1937 at the time
Japanese aircraft bombed the American
gunboat Pinay in the Yangtze River in
China the desire was to seize Japanese
assets and investments in the United
States and to extract payment for
damages the idea for a national
emergency Proclamation on the matter was
outlined by Hermann elephant a Treasury
Department legal expert and close
personal assistant to Treasury Secretary
Henry Morgenthau who was also involved
in developing the plan although a
memorandum on the scheme reached
President Roosevelt's desk he did not
implement it and there is no evidence to
indicate it was consulted on the
occasion of preparing the 1939
Proclamation Oliphant died in January
1939 see john morton bloom roosevelt and
Morgenthau boston Houghton's Mifflin
company 1970 pages 2 25 through 234 Liz
statutory powers granted under a
proclamation of national emergency at
this time
see Frank Murphy executive powers under
national emergency Washington the United
States government print of us 1939 76th
Congress second session Senate document
number 133 on the evolution and use of
emergency powers generally see US
Congress Senate special committee on
national emergencies and delegated
emergency powers a brief history of
emergency powers in the United States by
Harold C raelia Committee print 93rd
Congress second session Washington US
government print off Asst 1974 and
footnote it was a time of watching and
waiting
[Music]
this is our hidden history
you